Experiment 1: How to Install PIP on Windows?

Before we start with how to install pip for Python on Windows, let’s first go through the basic
introduction to Python. Python is a widely-used general-purpose, high-level programming language.
Python is a programming language that lets you work quickly and integrate systems more efficiently.
PIP is a package management system used to install and manage software packages/libraries written
in Python. These files are stored in a large “on-line repository” termed as Python Package Index
(PyPI). pip uses PyPI as the default source for packages and their dependencies. 

So whenever you type: Download and Install pip:
pip can be downloaded and installed using command-line by going through the following steps:
● Download the get-pip.py file and store it in the same directory as python is installed.
● Change the current path of the directory in the command line to the path of the directory where the
above file exists.
● Run the command given below: python get-pip.py and wait through the installation process. pip
is now installed on your system.

Verification of the Installation process:
One can easily verify if the pip has been installed correctly by performing a version check on the same.
Just go to the command line and execute the following command:
pip -V

To Install Various Packages using PIP : 
Syntax : pip install <package_name> pip will look for that package on PyPI and if found, 
it will download and install the package on your local system.
Packages :
a) Numpy:
NumPy is a Python package. It stands for 'Numerical Python'. It is a library consisting of
multidimensional array objects and a collection of routines for processing of array.
Numeric, the ancestor of NumPy, was developed by Jim Hugunin. Another package Numarray was
also developed, having some additional functionalities. In 2005, Travis Oliphant created NumPy
package by incorporating the features of Numarray into Numeric package. There are many
contributors to this open source project.
Operations using NumPy
Using NumPy, a developer can perform the following operations − ●
Mathematical and logical operations on arrays.
● Fourier transforms and routines for shape manipulation.
● Operations related to linear algebra. NumPy has in-built functions for linear algebra and random
number generation.

NumPy – A Replacement for MatLab
NumPy is often used along with packages like SciPy (Scientific Python) and Mat−plotlib (plotting
library). This combination is widely used as a replacement for MatLab, a popular platform for
technical computing. However, Python alternative to MatLab is now seen as a more modern and
complete programming language.
It is open source, which is an added advantage of NumPy

b) Scipy:
SciPy, pronounced as Sigh Pi, is a scientific python open source, distributed under the BSD licensed
library to perform Mathematical, Scientific and Engineering Computations.
The SciPy library depends on NumPy, which provides convenient and fast N-dimensional array
manipulation. The SciPy library is built to work with NumPy arrays and provides many userfriendly
and efficient numerical practices such as routines for numerical integration and optimization.
Together, they run on all popular operating systems, are quick to install and are free of charge. NumPy
and SciPy are easy to use, but powerful enough to depend on by some of the world's leading scientists
and engineers.

SciPy Sub-packages
SciPy is organized into sub-packages covering different scientific computing domains. These are
summarized in the following table –

scipy.cluster	 Vector quantization / Kmeans
scipy.constants	 Physical and mathematical
		constants
scipy.fftpack 	Fourier transform
scipy.integrate	 Integration routines
scipy.interpolate	 Interpolation
scipy.io		 Data input and output
scipy.linalg	 Linear algebra routines
scipy.ndimage	 n-dimensional image package
scipy.odr	 Orthogonal distance regression
scipy.optimize	 Optimization
scipy.signal	 Signal processing
scipy.sparse	 Sparse matrices
scipy.spatial	 Spatial data structures
		and algorithms
scipy.special	 Any special
		mathematical
		functions
scipy.stats	 Statistics

c) matplotlib
● plot(x, y): plot x and y using default line style and color.
● plot.axis([xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax]): scales the x-axis and y-axis from minimum to maximum
values
● plot.(x, y, color=’green’, marker=’o’, linestyle=’dashed’, linewidth=2, markersize=12): x and y
co-ordinates are marked using circular markers of size 12 and green color line with — style of width
2
● plot.xlabel(‘X-axis’): names x-axis ● plot.ylabel(‘Y-axis’): names y-axis
● plot(x, y, label = ‘Sample line ‘) plotted Sample Line will be displayed as a legend

d) scikit-learn
Scikit-Learn, also known as sklearn is a python library to implement machine learning models and
statistical modelling. Through scikit-learn, we can implement various machine learning models for
regression, classification, clustering, and statistical tools for analyzing these models. It also provides
functionality for dimensionality reduction, feature selection, feature extraction, ensemble
techniques, and inbuilt datasets. We will be looking into these features one by one. This library is
built upon NumPy, SciPy, and Matplotlib.



How to install PIP on windows?
---------------------------

Here's a step-by-step guide on how to install pip on Windows:

Method 1: Using the get-pip.py script

Download the script:

Go to https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py and download the get-pip.py script.
Save it to a convenient location on your computer, such as your Downloads folder.
Open a command prompt:

Press the Windows key, type "cmd," and press Enter.
Navigate to the script's directory:

Use the cd command to navigate to the directory where you saved the get-pip.py script. For example, if you saved it to your Downloads folder, you would type:
cd Downloads
Run the script:

Type the following command and press Enter:
python get-pip.py
Verify the installation:

Open a new command prompt and type:
pip --version
If the installation was successful, you should see the installed pip version.
Method 2: Using ensurepip

If you have a recent Python installation (3.4 or later), you can use the ensurepip module to install pip:

Open a command prompt.
Type the following command and press Enter:
python -m ensurepip --upgrade
Adding pip to your system's PATH (optional but recommended):

This step allows you to run pip from any command prompt, without navigating to its directory.

Open the System Properties window:
Press the Windows key, type "environment variables," and press Enter.
Click on "Environment Variables."
Under "System variables," find the "Path" variable and click "Edit."
Click "New" and add the path to your Python scripts directory. This is usually something like C:\Python310\Scripts.
Click "OK" to save the changes.
Now you can use pip to install Python packages from the command prompt. For example, to install the requests package, you would type:

pip install requests




